OSSM 3.0 TP1: OSSM-6973 Configuring OpenShift Monitoring Only with Service Mesh (#80662)
openshift/openshift-docs: modules/ossm-config-openshift-monitoring-only.adoc

// Module included in the following assemblies:
//
// * service-mesh-docs-main/metrics/ossm-metrics-assembly.adoc

:_mod-docs-content-type: PROCEDURE
[id="ossm-config-openshift-monitoring-only_{context}"]
= Configuring OpenShift Monitoring with Service Mesh

// This is WITHOUT Kiali.
// TP1 content. TP banner is persistent and handled by Tim O'Keefe in a different PR.
// Possible file name may change
// Possible assembly file may change
// Assemblies, topic map info needs to be worked out still for 3.0.

> The following steps show how to integrate {SMProductName} with user-workload monitoring.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
You can integrate {SMProductName} with user-workload monitoring.
```

I guess with SEO searches, statements dependent on the lead=in sentence will get dropped, so its best to focus on the user perspective, IMO.

.Prerequisites

* {SMProductName} is installed.

* User-workload monitoring is enabled. See link:https://docs.openshift.com/container-platform/4.16/observability/monitoring/enabling-monitoring-for-user-defined-projects.html[Enabling monitoring for user-defined projects].

.Procedure

. Apply a `ServiceMonitor` object to monitor the Istio control plane:
+
.Example `ServiceMonitor` object
[source,yaml]
----
apiVersion: monitoring.coreos.com/v1
kind: ServiceMonitor
metadata:
  name: istiod-monitor
  namespace: istio-system
spec:
  targetLabels:
  - app
  selector:
    matchLabels:
      istio: pilot
  endpoints:
  - port: http-monitoring

>     interval: 30s

Reviewer: add "# ..." as this might not be a complete YAML file? 

See [doc_guidelines.adoc](https://github.com/openshift/openshift-docs/blob/main/contributing_to_docs/doc_guidelines.adoc#signs-and-symbols-in-code-blocks)

Reviewer 2: This is a complete yaml file. It's just short :)

----

. Apply a `PodMonitor` object to collect metrics from Istio proxies:
+
.Example `PodMonitor` object
[source,yaml]
----
apiVersion: monitoring.coreos.com/v1
kind: PodMonitor
metadata:
  name: istio-proxies-monitor
  namespace: istio-system # <1>
spec:
  selector:
    matchExpressions:
    - key: istio-prometheus-ignore
      operator: DoesNotExist
  podMetricsEndpoints:
  - path: /stats/prometheus
    interval: 30s
    relabelings:
    - action: keep
      sourceLabels: [__meta_kubernetes_pod_container_name]
      regex: "istio-proxy"
    - action: keep
      sourceLabels: [__meta_kubernetes_pod_annotationpresent_prometheus_io_scrape]
    - action: replace
      regex: (\d+);(([A-Fa-f0-9]{1,4}::?){1,7}[A-Fa-f0-9]{1,4})
      replacement: '[$2]:$1'

>       sourceLabels: [__meta_kubernetes_pod_annotation_prometheus_io_port,

Reviewer: The values in brackets do not highlight correctly on the preview link: 

![Screenshot from 2024-08-30 12-26-23](https://github.com/user-attachments/assets/5d140985-0a26-4d93-9837-c37e36c21b7d)

I've not seen brackets in use like this, maybe parentheses should be used?

I'd recommend punching the code block into a YAML linter (https://www.yamllint.com/) and seeing the output: 

![Screenshot from 2024-08-30 12-27-46](https://github.com/user-attachments/assets/db088125-62c0-496e-8313-c210d7681d71)

Author: The `" "` present in the source https://github.com/istio-ecosystem/sail-operator/tree/main/docs#scraping-metrics-using-the-openshift-monitoring-stack somehow got dropped/removed.  

Checked https://github.com/istio-ecosystem/sail-operator/tree/main/docs#scraping-metrics-using-the-openshift-monitoring-stack against the file in this PR, added back missing `" "` and ran it against YAML linter, and it checked out. 

Have asked Dev to double-check/verify.

      __meta_kubernetes_pod_ip]
      targetLabel: __address__
    - action: replace
      regex: (\d+);((([0-9]+?)(\.|$)){4})

>       replacement: `$2:$1`

Reviewer 2: This can't be backticks
```suggestion
      replacement: '$2:$1'
```

      sourceLabels: [__meta_kubernetes_pod_annotation_prometheus_io_port,
      __meta_kubernetes_pod_ip]
      targetLabel: __address__
    - action: labeldrop
      regex: "__meta_kubernetes_pod_label_(.+)"
    - sourceLabels: [__meta_kubernetes_namespace]
      action: replace
      targetLabel: namespace
    - sourceLabels: [__meta_kubernetes_pod_name]
      action: replace
      targetLabel: pod_name
----

> <1> Since {ocp-product-title} monitoring ignores the `namespaceSelector` spec in `ServiceMonitor` and `PodMonitor` objects, you must apply the `PodMonitor` object in all mesh namespaces, including the Istio control plane namespace.

Reviewer: ![Screenshot from 2024-08-30 12-25-39](https://github.com/user-attachments/assets/33030eea-da1c-4e24-9c1b-ad369ccb9c86)

+

> . Go to the {ocp-short-name} Console -> **Observe** -> **Metrics**, and try the query `istio_requests_total`.

Reviewer: "Try" here makes the step seem optional. Is this the case? Maybe drop "Try" and explicitly state it's a required action on the customer's part?

[NOTE]
====

> It can take a few minutes for the query to return results.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The **Metrics** implementation can take a few minutes for the query to return results.
```

// Module included in the following assemblies:
//
// * service-mesh-docs-main/metrics/ossm-metrics-assembly.adoc

:_mod-docs-content-type: PROCEDURE
[id="ossm-config-openshift-monitoring-only_{context}"]
= Configuring OpenShift Monitoring with Service Mesh
:context: ossm-config-openshift-monitoring-only

//Need some kind of intro
//Possible file name may change
//Possible assembly file may change
//Assemblies, topic map info needs to be worked out still for 3.0, now that docs has a better idea of what is to be included for 3.0 TP1.

//FIX THE STYLE THINGS ONCE DEV HAS REVIEWED/APPROVED THE CONTENT. First priority is ensuring the steps are in the correct order, and are accurate for 3.0 TP1.

The following steps show how to integrate {SMProductName} with user-workload monitoring.

.Prerequisite

>  * Monitoring for user-defined projects is enabled. See "Enabling monitoring for user-defined projects".

Reviewer 2: Can 'See "Enabled monitoring for user-defined  projects"' be a link? Otherwise you have to scroll down to the bottom of the page to find the link.

Author: Unfortunately, no. For style and technical reasons, they must go in an "Additional resources" section.

* `user-workload monitoring` is enabled. See "Enabling monitoring for user-defined projects".

.Procedure

. Apply a `ServiceMonitor` object to monitor the Istio control plane:
+
.Example `ServiceMonitor` object
[source,yaml]
----
apiVersion: monitoring.coreos.com/v1
kind: ServiceMonitor
metadata:
  name: istiod-monitor
  namespace: istio-system
spec:
  targetLabels:
  - app
  selector:
    matchLabels:
      istio: pilot
  endpoints:
  - port: http-monitoring
    interval: 30s

>     relabelings:
>     - action: replace
>       replacement: "basic-istio-system"
>       targetLabel: mesh_id

Reviewer 2: Since we removed `mesh_id` from the `PodMonitor` you can remove it here as well.
```suggestion
    relabelings:
    - action: replace
      replacement: "basic-istio-system"
      targetLabel: mesh_id
```

. Apply a `PodMonitor` object to collect metrics from Istio proxies:
+
.Example PodMonitor object
[source,yaml]
----
apiVersion: monitoring.coreos.com/v1
kind: PodMonitor
metadata:
  name: istio-proxies-monitor

>   namespace: istio-system

Reviewer 2: In the [original docs from 2.X](https://docs.openshift.com/container-platform/4.16/service_mesh/v2x/ossm-observability.html#ossm-integrating-with-user-workload-monitoring_observability) in Step 7, this example YAML had a little number next to it with a note. The reason being that this `PodMonitor` example needs to be applied in every application namespace e.g. when you deploy the `bookinfo` app, this `PodMonitor` yaml should get deployed there as well. We'll need some kind of similar note for these docs as well.

Author: There was no note here https://github.com/istio-ecosystem/sail-operator/tree/main/docs#scraping-metrics-using-the-openshift-monitoring-stack so it was not added.

<1> says: Since OpenShift Container Platform monitoring ignores the namespaceSelector spec in ServiceMonitor and PodMonitor objects, you must apply the PodMonitor object in all mesh namespaces, including the control plane namespace.

does "including the control plane namespace" still apply? Or does "including the control plane namespace" get removed for 3.0?

spec:
  selector:
    matchExpressions:
    - key: istio-prometheus-ignore
      operator: DoesNotExist
  podMetricsEndpoints:
  - path: /stats/prometheus
    interval: 30s
    relabelings:
    - action: keep
      sourceLabels: [__meta_kubernetes_pod_container_name]
      regex: "istio-proxy"
    - action: keep
      sourceLabels: [__meta_kubernetes_pod_annotationpresent_prometheus_io_scrape]
    - action: replace
      regex: (\d+);(([A-Fa-f0-9]{1,4}::?){1,7}[A-Fa-f0-9]{1,4})
      replacement: '[$2]:$1'
      sourceLabels: [__meta_kubernetes_pod_annotation_prometheus_io_port,
      __meta_kubernetes_pod_ip]
      targetLabel: __address__
    - action: replace
      regex: (\d+);((([0-9]+?)(\.|$)){4})

>       replacement: $2:$1

Reviewer 2: When I go to apply this YAML `kubectl` or `oc` complain about this line. I _think_ this is equivalent 
```suggestion
      replacement: '$2:$1'
```

      sourceLabels: [__meta_kubernetes_pod_annotation_prometheus_io_port,
      __meta_kubernetes_pod_ip]
      targetLabel: __address__
    - action: labeldrop
      regex: "__meta_kubernetes_pod_label_(.+)"
    - sourceLabels: [__meta_kubernetes_namespace]
      action: replace
      targetLabel: namespace
    - sourceLabels: [__meta_kubernetes_pod_name]
      action: replace
      targetLabel: pod_name
    - action: replace
      replacement: "basic-istio-system"
      targetLabel: mesh_id
----
+

> . Go to **Observe** -> **Metrics** and try the query `istio_requests_total`.

Reviewer 2: These instructions are the same as the 2.X version so take this comment with a grain of salt but it might be worth noting here that it can take awhile for the new endpoints to get scraped by prometheus and because of that it can take awhile for the `istio_requests_total` query to return anything. I don't want to over-complicate this since this is what we already had for 2.X but there are also other ways of verifying that 1. Your app endpoints are being scraped correctly 2. Your controlplane metrics are being scraped correctly. I'm fine with merging this as is though since this is what was already there for 2.X.
